we're seeing the members of the
government and Dominic Rob there take
the podium for today everything welcome
to the daily corner buyers press
conference from Downing Street and I'm
joined by Chris witty the government's
chief medical officer and also so
Patrick balance the government's chief
scientific adviser so Patrick is going
to provide an update on the latest
coronavirus data but first let me update
you on the steps we're taking to defeat
the krona virus and also the decisions
that we've taken today step-by-step our
action plan aims to slow the spread of
corinna virus so that fewer people need
hospital treatment at any one time and
that's the way we can protect the NHS
from becoming overwhelmed this way
we follow very carefully and
deliberately the scientific and medical
advice that we received so that we take
the right steps at the right moment in
time at the same time we're dramatically
expanding NHS capacity in terms of the
number of beds key staff life-saving
equipment on the frontline so people get
the care that they need at the point in
time that they need it most and that's
also why we've directed people to stay
at home to deny coronavirus the
opportunity to spread to protect the NHS
and to save lives now today's data shows
that three hundred and twenty seven
thousand six hundred and eight people in
the UK have now been tested for the
corona virus 103 thousand and ninety
three people have tested positive and
sadly of those with the virus thirteen
thousand seven hundred and twenty nine
have now died and they these are
heartbreaking losses that every family
affected and it reminds us exactly why
we need to follow the social distancing
guidance earlier today I chaired
meetings of the cabinet and Cobra to
consider the advice from sage on the
impact of the existing social distancing
measures there are indications that the
measures have been put it that we put in
place have been successful in slowing
down the spread of this virus but sage
also say that it is a mixed
an inconsistent picture and in some
settings infections are still likely to
be increasing sage assess that the rate
of infection or the so-called r-value is
almost certainly below one in the
community and that means that on average
each person that's infected in turn
affects less than one other person but
overall we still don't have the
infection rate down as far as we need to
as in other countries we have issues
with the virus spreading in some
hospitals and in care homes and in some
the very clear advice we received is
that any change to our social distance
social distancing measures now would
risk a significant increase in the
spread of the virus that would threaten
a second peak of the virus and
substantially increase the number of
deaths it would undo the progress that
we've made to date and as a result would
require an even longer period of the
more restrictive social distancing
measures so early relaxation would do
more damage to the economy over the
longer period over a longer period and I
want to be really clear about this the
advice from Sage is that relaxing any of
the measures currently in place would
re-establish to both public health and
our economy Patrick and Chris will be
able to go into further details on all
of this shortly but based on this advice
which we very carefully considered the
government has decided that the current
measures must remain in place for at
least the next three weeks now in terms
of the decisions that lie ahead we want
to be as upfront with the British people
as we possibly can so let me set out
five specific things which the
government will need to be satisfied of
before we will consider it safe to
adjust any of the current measures first
we must protect the NHS his ability to
cope we must be confident that we're
able to provide sufficient critical care
and specialist treatment right across
the UK the NH staff have been incredible
we must continue to support them as much
as we can
second we need to see a sustained and
consistent fall in the daily death rates
from coronavirus so we're confident
that we've moved beyond the peak third
we need to have reliable data from sage
showing that the rate of infection is
decreasing to manageable levels across
the board fourth we need to be confident
that the range of operational challenges
including testing capacity and PPE are
in hand with supply able to meet future
demand fifth and this is really crucial
we must be confident that any
adjustments to the current measures will
not risk a second peak of infections
that overwhelm the NHS the worst thing
that we could do right now is to ease up
too soon allow a second peak of the
virus to hit the NHS and hit the British
people it will be the worst outcome not
just for public health but for the
economy and for our country as a whole
so the current restrictions will remain
in place the government will continue to
monitor the data on the impact of the
virus will soon be able to test 100,000
people every day that will give us a
greater understanding of the scope of
infection across the country it will
also help us plan how to change the
measures when we're ready to do so when
we are confident on these five points
guided by the science guided by the data
we will look to adjust the measures to
make them as effective as effective as
possible in protecting public health
whilst allowing some economic and social
activity to resume but we will only do
it when the evidence demonstrates that
it is safe to do it it could involve
relaxing measures in some areas while
strengthening measures in other areas
but in formulating the right balance we
will be at all times guided by the
scientific advice and the evidence I
should add at this point that we we
recognise all the economic and social
impact that the current measures are
having that's why we put in place in an
unprecedented package of support for
jobs for businesses but also for
hospices and charities who are doing so
much to support the most vulnerable in
our society and I know that many people
would like to hear more details some
people are calling for exact dates on
what will happen next and when so we're
being as open as we responsibly can at
this stage and it would not be
responsible to prejudge the evidence
that sage will have and review in just a
few weeks time now I know some people
will look at other countries and say why
is the UK not doing what they're doing
and I can reassure people that we
carefully follow what is happening in
other countries we will always look to
learn any lessons in how they're
approaching their response and I'm
talking to foreign ministers on a daily
basis I know Chris and Patrick are doing
the same with their opposite numbers
around the world ultimately though we've
got to do what is right for the British
people based on the advice of our
experts grounded in the conditions
prevailing here in the UK and we will
make those decisions at the right time
for this country that's what we've done
so far and that's what we'll continue to
do I appreciate that the impact of these
measures is considerable on people on
businesses across the country whether
it's their costs being shouldered the
sacrifices people are making be isolated
from friends and family all households
cooped up inside all week long parents
having difficult conversations with a
young children who just don't understand
why they can't go and see their
grandparents or go outside and meet up
with friends as they would normally do
family struggling to manage home
schooling and at the same time balancing
that with working from home I know there
are people very concerned about their
household finances uncertain about their
jobs worried for their small business
that remains closed we get it we know
it's rough going at this time and every
time I come to this lectern and I read
out the grim toll of people who are so
sadly passed away I walk away from here
and I think about what their sons and
their daughters must be going through
right now their brothers their sisters
their grandchildren all the loved ones
left behind without unbearable
life-changing long-term grief
it makes me it makes this government
focus even harder or what we must do and
I know that together united we must keep
up this national effort for a while
longer we've just come too far we've
lost too many loved ones we've already
sacrificed far too much to ease up now
especially especially when we're
beginning to see the evidence that our
efforts are starting to pay off and your
efforts are paying off there is light at
the end of the tunnel but we're now at
both a delicate and a dangerous stage in
this pandemic if we rush to relax the
measures that we have in place we would
risk wasting all the sacrifices and all
the progress that has been made and that
would risk a quick return to another
lockdown with all the threat to life
that a second peak of the virus would
bring and all the economic damage that a
second lockdown would carry so we need
to be patient
a while longer so please please stay
home save lives and protect the NHS so
we can safely return to life as close to
normal as possible as soon as possible
it's been an incredible national team
effort now is not the moment to give the
coronavirus a second chance let's stick
together let's see this through and
let's defeat the coronavirus feel good
now Patrick I don't know whether you're
going to give us some more detail on
both the state of the corona virus but
also sages advice today yes can I have
the first slide please this is one
you've seen before is the transport use
showing the reduction that's maintained
down
it is these sorts of changes the fact
that we've managed all of us to keep our
social distancing going that's meant
that the transmission of the virus in
the community has reduced and sage
looked very carefully at all of the
evidence and is of the opinion that it
is highly likely that the r is below one
the transmission force of the virus is
below one meaning as the first secretary
has said that one person
on average be infecting fewer than one
other person that's an important change
it means in the community it's likely
that the virus and the epidemic is now
shrinking there are areas such as
hospitals and social care settings where
there may be growth in some places but
overall the are is below one but we
can't say by how much next slide please
this shows the new cases of course as
I've said before this is just the cases
that are tested in hospital so it's not
the totality the blue bars are the
people who are tested in hospital and
there is a flattening and possibly a
signs of decrease the orange bars show
that the testing has now been expanded
to critical workers in the NHS social
care and other sectors and of course
cases are being picked up amongst that
population too but the overall message
is that cases or at least flattening and
maybe decreasing next slide please
this is probably the critical slide this
shows people in hospital beds with
covert infection and here you can see
across many regions the numbers are
decreasing in some they're flat so there
is some regional variation but again
this is consistent with the idea that
the R is below 1 somewhere between 0.5
and 1 the closer it is to 1 the more
likely it is that even small changes in
the measures that are in place could
lead to the are going above 1 if the R
goes above 1 this starts to grow again
fast it may be quite difficult to
predict and detect that growth and then
we run the risk of a second peak with
all of the damage that that will cause
to health and to the economy so at the
moment this is looking in a good place
it's beginning to come down beginning to
stabilize and some
places and it's important that all the
measures that we're taking stay in place
in order to allow us to maintain this
level of control and to see the epidemic
begin to decrease final slide please
sadly of course there are people who
have died from this awful virus
I expect the deaths to reach a plateau
and to stay up a bit for a little while
and then to decrease thereafter and what
you can see on this slide is both the
deaths in hospital and in the all
settings from the office for national
statistics data so the total picture can
be seen so sages view is that our is
below 1 that the changes that we've all
made to our lives has made a difference
and will continue to make a difference
and it's important that we continue with
those in order to drive the numbers down
and to get ourselves into a position
where we can see that this is really now
decreasing as an epidemic patro thank
you very much so we'll take some
questions from the media is Laura Coons
back there for the BBC and yes thank you
foreign secretary and you've been very
clear about why in your view and sages
view now is not the time but can you
give the public any hope of when the
restrictions might start to lift as you
said yourself in other countries people
have been told when and what to expect
from what you know now is it more likely
that we're looking at another three
weeks or maybe another three months well
the prime minister said at the outset
that it would take three months to come
through the peak and I think that
broadly is still the outline but what we
set out today is our approach which will
be step-by-step guided by the evidence
it will be reviewed by Sage at the end
of the month and we've set out five
points of principle if you like that
will guide us so we can't give a
definitive timeframe that would be to
prejudge the evidence that wouldn't be a
responsible thing to do but our message
to the British public is there is light
at the end of the tunnel we are making
progress
but at the same time we must keep up the
social distancing measures and there
have been all sorts of challenges or as
you'll know with this coronavirus crisis
but one of the things that we've seen is
the country pulled together follow
pretty consistently the guidance and
that is one of the reasons that we've
made the progress that we have
notwithstanding the significant huge
losses that I've described you want to
come back yeah I mean as you say people
have overwhelmingly listened to the
government's guidance and followed it
why do you think then you can't share
with the public anything about what
might be next we can I've come and done
these press conferences multiple times
we do them on a daily basis the problem
is not not being willing to talk to the
public in about the detail of this it's
that if we prejudice the data and the
evidence that sage is getting both on
the spread of the virus and the extent
to which we get it down well below the
level r1 we would be prejudging the
decision that we need to take and
likewise the evidence sage is getting is
constantly informing it's an iterative
process the the options that we've got
so what I've tried to do is be as
upfront as possible and set out the the
principles if you like the five
principles that can give I think a bit
of hope to the country and also to say
come on we've got to keep this up what
you're doing is working I think we can
see the signs of that but we're standing
there the death toll which is a huge
tragedy for so many people but we must
stay the course and if we let up now it
would be as Sir Patrick has explained
damaging for public health but also
damaging for the economy there's no it's
not a trade off here we get a second
peak it's not just damaging the for
people's health and and for public
safety and we'll also end up back in a
second lock down which would prolong the
economic risks so we're taking the right
decision at the right time as we've
always said and the truth is if I start
giving you artificial and arbitrary
timeframes it would be the irresponsible
thing to do and I and I can't do that
Tom Clark for my TV thank you very much
foreign secretary and in yesterday's
press briefing
professor Witte when asked about
how we should manage this next phase the
outbreak that data that stage and easily
were talking about he said one bit of
information really useful is serology
data mainly this is the the survey data
of blood supplies from the country to
get a sense of how much of the
population has been infected with the
virus and therefore how many may be
immune to it the Phe labs important down
have tested more than three thousands of
samples from that survey but the results
have yet to be published is that because
as I understand it from scientists are
familiar with the word going on there
that these tests are not delivering
reliable results either because the
tests themselves all because of what's
going on in the immune systems of people
who are being infected and where does
that leave us in terms of figuring out
how big a potential second vehicle how
long we have to stay in a lockdown
situation is are we currently flying
blind
thank you Tom I'll let Chris address
that thank you so thorough serology data
is going to be absolutely critical for a
whole lot of reasons the most important
of which at this point of the epidemic
is to work out what proportion of people
look as if they have been infected we
have a kind of s crude estimate but
that's a way of measuring it directly it
will in the longer term also probably be
important in understanding our options
for for example getting a vaccine and it
may also be useful in very longer-term
it to provide evidence that someone has
that had an infection and they remain
immune if the tests are reliable now
that's why it's important you're you're
absolutely right that there is a lot of
work not just going on important and to
be clear there are now substantial
bodies of work in the academic sector in
public health England
and in many commercial areas because
everybody wants to have an accurate
serology and there are several different
ways of approaching this and different
people are going down different groups
broadly there are three things that have
slowed us down to date the first of
which is we don't yet have a serological
tests which we can put a lot of reliance
on although it can give us a ranging
shot and we do expect to have really
quite crude early data but
definitely needs to be improved on the
second thing is that we don't yet have a
good sampling what's called a sampling
frame in epidemiological terms and what
we're trying to do is get that set up
across the country so that we have a
wide view about what's happened in this
infection in various areas but the third
thing which is just a fact of biology is
that it takes probably at least
twenty-one days for the tests to be
reliable so you're always looking back
in time on this and early data will
therefore be because looking back in
time 21 days the epidemic was a much
earlier stage before we've reached the
evidence of at the beginning of a peak
which Sir Patrick talked about that is a
very different stage of the infection
and we will get the data would become
more useful over time but you know we're
moving very fast in this area
scientifically but we are definitely not
there in either of the issues of getting
a thorough lot serology or getting the
sampling frame but we probably have a
crude ranging shot fairly soon and
that's the consensus of the scientists
involved because you're pretty detailed
answer is there anything I wanted to
come back on an interesting addition
state of it to the data we've got this
all cases addition to the to the number
of cases so that's outside of the
hospital setting how it looks like
that's gonna be very important is it
going to change
Sage's predictions of how the peak is
manifesting itself manifesting itself
and what is happening with our
specifically are we seeing faster
transmission for example in the care
home setting at the moment and that's
something you're now going to have to
factor in to any next phase response
Patrick I'll let you address that one
well as I said before I think it's very
important to have the hospital death
rate and the total death rate it's worth
remembering again that the ONS rates are
people who got covered on their death
certificate it doesn't necessarily mean
they were infected because they many of
them haven't been tested so we just need
to run
and the difference in terms of the sage
view the Sade view is looking at the are
of the transmission in the community and
I don't think any of those data change
that opinion as to where the R is as
I've said it's not true that the r is
necessarily below one in every hospital
or in every care and that's the
important area that we now need to look
at and make sure that that the
appropriate measures are in place to try
and reduce the are there but it doesn't
change the overall view that I've
described that the our overall is below
1 and therefore we expect to see the
slowing and the turn of the epidemic I
think Chris wanted to just add something
yes so just just on top of what Sir
Patrick said the ons data of course
tells us not only the people who are
diagnosed as having Co vide on the death
certificate with a diagnosis some of
which is on a basis of tests some on the
basis of the fact that doctor thought is
likely but not definite but it also
gives an indication of what's called
excess mortality the difference between
the normal death rate sadly at this time
of year and what we got at the moment
and that's been changing over time and
there are some additional deaths on top
of the ones that you would expect for
this time of year
so in the last week for which we have
data from ons three thousand four
hundred seventy five people were
diagnosed as having coded some of them
from in hospital
some of them from out of hospital but
the excess mortality was over in terms
of the period as a whole for that week
was depending whether you compare it to
the week before or at the same week last
year somewhere between five and six
thousand people and that does a gap
between those now that could be just
random variation but one of the things
that we've said from the beginning is
that people died for many reasons in
epidemics they include the direct cause
of death but they can also include
people who died for example if they
stayed at home because they were worried
that going into hospital was dangerous
for them and actually they have a heart
attack or a stroke or something
important like that
and the reason I'm making this point
other than just to clarify the data is
it is really critical for people to
realize if they're having a medical
emergency
we really appreciate people taking
pressure off the NHS for the less urgent
things but if they're having a medical
emergency a heart attack a stroke or
really bad a flare-up of asthma things
like that which could be
life-threatening one of the things that
the British public have done by taking
the pressure off the NHS by staying at
home and my remarkable colleagues in the
NHS have done by building up NHS
capacity as we've always maintained the
ability to handle emergencies where the
Cova door not and I really want to
encourage people that if they have other
medical emergencies the NHS NHS is open
for business and we really must
encourage people who are having these
life-threatening or life-changing things
to go to hospital go contact NHS
one-one-one where that's necessary
because what we would be very sad to
have a situation where people's
activities and the NHS had managed to
preserve the ability to do emergencies
and people were not coming forward Tom
thanks very much Sam Coates from Sky
News Dominic Rob sky analysis has found
that 70% of front-line health and social
care staff who died from coronavirus
were from a non-white and Bane
background now people in that community
are very worried they know you're having
a review because you've been ousted but
what specifically can you say to help
them is the government on their side
what is your message for that community
and to patrie violence in Chris witty
Dominic Rob just said that we could
eventually relax in some areas and
strengthen the lockdown in others but
every time older people hear things like
that they get worried seeing everybody
else as the priority there's a perhaps
justified fear that they might be kept
indoors until there's a vaccine which
might be 18 months they are worried that
they might ever never see their
grandkids for at least another year
what's your message to them at this
anxious time well Sam first of all on
the your first question on the BME or
any other demographic breakdown to the
data I think I'm going to defer to
Patrick in terms of the analysis of that
but absolute
Lee we're on the side of anyone frankly
this coronavirus doesn't discriminate
but we will want to follow very
carefully any of the analysis of the
data in the way you described and on
your second point and I'll certainly let
Patrick and Chris comment what I said
was measures could involve a various
different permutations some getting
stronger some easing off we haven't made
up our mind on any of that but our
priority has been to safeguard life one
of the things that the British public
have been very effective in doing is is
their nine coronavirus their means to
spread and of course we know that the
and the data shows very clearly that
those who are older will have a
pre-existing condition are particularly
vulnerable so far from wanting to take
measures which disproportionately
prejudice them we want to take measures
which safeguard them and that's been the
guiding principle in relation to anyone
who's particularly vulnerable to the
corona virus throughout this crisis I
don't know where they're Chris or
Patrick the second question then Chris I
think you might take the one on
ethnicity on the second one our aim is
very clear which is to get the numbers
down now and that means the social
distance you measure that in place need
to stay in place in order to reduce the
numbers of people with the infection in
the community that allows the I mean
that's because the R comes down but it's
also the absolute number that needs to
come down so we've got fewer people
carrying the infection once we're at
that stage then you can start to think
about which of the measures that make
most sense to release in order to not
have another growth and put the R above
one and in doing so the aim there is to
try and do that in a way that allows
everything to start moving more towards
normal not to segregate on certain
groups and so on and say that there is
there is a differential approach to this
now it may be necessary when you look at
different jobs and different things to
think about how you do that in a way
that's safe but the aim certainly in
terms of how we're viewing it from the
scientific angle is to try to understand
the basic principles that reduce
transmission and allow the policy makers
to take those basic principles and apply
them
in a number of different settings so
it's absolutely critical that we find
out which groups are most at risk so
that we can help to protect them and
obviously there are three things which
are really clear an ethnicity is less
clear the three things that are very
clear or age and that's one of the
reasons it's so critical to protect
older citizens people have got
comorbidities speaker we've got more
than one other disease things like
cardiovascular disease and if you look
at the ONS data on this over 90% of
people who have sadly died of this had
at least one other disease many of them
had more than one and actually male sex
is ace is a very clear risk factor for
reasons that not absolutely clear ethnic
my being a member of an ethnic minority
group is less clear and we both looked
and I've had discussions with scientists
about this in terms of trying to tease
us apart today also looking very
specifically at healthcare workers with
leaders of the NHS and across the
medical and nursing professions because
this is something we are very keen to
get extremely clear we've asked public
health England to look at this in some
detail and then what we really want is
if we see any signal at all we want to
then know what next we can do about it
to minimise risk but to be at this point
in time whilst the aged comorbidity and
gender is clear this is not yet clear in
terms of ethnic minorities and we need
to look at this more carefully and get
this right Sam would you like to come
back on any of that
just one thing it sometimes feels like
ministers number 10 are trying to
pretend that there isn't a debate about
what happens next but you only have to
pick up a paper or look at a TV
broadcast to see plenty of people
speculating about the what leg next and
the easing of the lock down is it really
wise and sensible for ministers to
almost absent themselves from the from
the field in this debate given that it's
happening anyway I don't think we can be
accused of absent in ourselves from the
debate we turn up to these Downing
Street press conferences I've set out
the five principles I've also explained
why I know the means we always want to
tease out what the next question is that
needs to be our
but why it would be irresponsible for us
to set out in either more detail the
measures that are being considered as
potential options or indeed the
timeframe because we don't have the data
yet from Sage so we'll continue to be
guided by the principles we started with
that is follow the scientific evidence
take the right decisions at the right
moment in time and I think I just that
fully in my remarks been Kentish from
LBC thank you first secretary said today
that the spread of the virus in the
community is because the sacrifices
people making on the way down but in
care homes and hospitals it's on the way
up whether that's because of a lack of
protective equipment and lack of testing
or another reason would you accept that
the measures in place in those settings
have proved inadequate and what will you
do to make sure that some of the most
vulnerable people in the country aren't
put at further risk in places where they
ought to feel safe and if I could just
ask professor Witte you talked very
openly there about the indirect cost
there indirect deaths that arise
effectively as a result of the lockdown
I'm really interested to know whether
you've modeled that whether you're able
to put a number on what would be
expected and some scientists have warned
that in time those deaths will outweigh
the deaths from the virus itself are you
confident that we're a long way from
that point and are you able to say when
it might come thank you
Thanks well so first of all the corona
virus doesn't apply doesn't spread in a
uniform consistent or way and so you're
absolutely right we've made progress I
think Patrick and Chris has set that out
but in terms of care homes we're
absolutely gripping this the home health
secretary on Wednesday set out a plan
and you asked in particular what's the
detail of what we're doing that the plan
was to make sure that all care home
residents and staff with symptoms when
we tested that all patients discharged
from hospital hospital will be tested
before going into care homes homes are
being care homes are being supported
with different mechanisms to order PPE
quickly we had a local resilience forum
drop to so to deal with distribution to
care homes obviously dispersed more
widely than hospitals we've had one last
week with
another one this week we're working up
there clipper service which will
regularize and expedite the distribution
more generally we've got the plan to
expand the workforce in care homes to
20,000 through a new recruitment
campaign and new guidance to minimize
the spread of the infection so we
recognize that the virus hasn't spread
uniformly we absolutely committed to
making sure wherever it's read its it is
being tackled and as targeted and as
concrete way as we possibly can I think
Patrick we users did you get the second
one was that Chris I think me first but
you might want to add to that I mean
I've said from the early on you're
absolutely right that indirect deaths we
need to think about an indirect other
illness death is not the only thing if
someone has had for example you know a
major operation postponed that also is
something that we need to remember and
take account of so just to read remind
people the four things I've laid out our
direct deaths from the coronavirus
indirect deaths because the NHS
emergency services are overwhelmed and
because of what the British public have
done and because of the fantastic work
of mine NHS colleagues we have not come
close to that and we do not intend to
come close to that but the two other
forms are indirect deaths because the
NHS is reoriented towards Cove in 19 and
therefore less able to do other things
that are not necessarily so urgent but
are very important and then finally we
know that anything that increases
deprivation can in the long run cause
issues and we are absolutely looking at
how what how these work and how they
interact because in coming to the next
phase of this we need to take account of
all of those rather than just think
about the direct codedes because if we
just thought about those we could end up
having a much less targeted approach and
one that didn't allow the NHS to respond
properly to all these other indirect
causes and this is actually something
which sage which the Patrick Patrick
chairs has looked at in some detail and
will continue to do so Patrick we look
at it and and just to reiterate the
point I made earlier on at the moment
this is not a tension between the
economy and health
it's very clear what we need to do now
which is to keep this down stop this
from coming back again stop a second
wave which would need a second lockdown
if that occurs and make sure that we get
things down to a level where this is
manageable so those two things are not
in conflict at the moment but yes we do
absolutely look at those long-term
consequences and modeling that and
thinking about what the implications of
that is and would you like to come back
on any of that yes if I may just on the
Karen point first secretary it would
seem the new measures that were
introduced this week were recognition
that there wasn't enough in place to
protect people in caves hospitals are
you confident then our is and that those
measures will be enough to protect
people in those sets well I noted that
care England which represents the
independent providers in the care sector
that said it was heartening to know the
government is listening and it's really
important and we are continuing to
listen and as I said this virus the way
it has spread has not been uniform or
predictable and we want to make sure
that wherever it spreads as we try and
get it down overall that we're there to
make sure we got the measures in place
they're testing in place the equipment
in place to deal with it as soon as and
as rapidly as possible thanks Ben
Dominic Yeatman for Metro hello first
secretary
professor Fergusson said this morning
that we will need to keep significant
level of social distancing until we have
a vaccine which we understand may take
18 months are you scared about
discussing an exit strategy because
there will be no real exit and secondly
can I ask you do you agree with the
World Health Organization's assessment
this morning which but it's in the same
camp as Russia and Belarus with regard
to our success in controlling the
outbreak well I don't think the date are
internationally and Patrick talked
through some of it which shows the
international comparisons would bear
that out but I I haven't heard and seen
the direct comments oil oil past
judgment for the moment on that and and
in relation to your question about Neal
and I'll ask Patrick to comment on it
but we've been very clear that we'll
take the right decisions at the right
moments based on the evidence and they
may well
involve a transition out of the current
measures and of course they could be
calibrated in different ways and the
reason that we need to do that is based
on the five principles that I set out
how do we do this in a reliable way
which protects the NHS at the same time
as allowing us to ease up on the economy
and engage more in the SIRT kind of
social activities that people want to so
I completely agree that the way out of
this is vaccines and therapeutics those
are going to be critically important
there are vaccine programs across the
world over 80 around the world probably
four of those are in the in the clinic
now there are also therapeutic programs
both old drugs and people making new
drugs and those are going to be
critically important in terms of
reducing the effects of this disease and
potentially reducing transmission so
vaccines and therapeutics critically
important no question about it and the
UK of course is somewhere where lots of
that work is going on now where we are
now as I've said is that the social
distancing measures are needed to reduce
the levels right down to a low level at
that point there may be decisions about
which one's to relax and which ones not
to relax it's important to keep the are
below one and this is all about trying
to reduce contacts particularly between
households reduce transmission and keep
the levels low across the community so
there may be a number of measures that
need to continue in order to allow that
to be suppressed and controlled whilst
vaccines and therapeutics come along but
that's very different from saying that
the measures that are in place now are
the ones that need to be in place long
term so yes there will be some changes I
think that need to take place that have
already taken place around things like
home working that are going to be
important to maintain that ability to
break transmission but vaccines and
therapeutics are now being very actively
looked at right the way across the world
including in the UK don't it would you
like to follow up on that thank you and
just in terms of lifting the lockdown
how can you give us some idea of how
many daily tests will have to be
available before community testing can
begin well we've got the initial target
of getting to a hundred thousand and
then after that we'll want to keep
ramping it up beyond that and I think
one of the crucial things that sage will
do over the next couple of weeks till
the end of the month is then feed back
on us on the evidence of how the
evidence on the impact that the measures
we've taken have had on the virus what
we need to consider in relation to that
evidence in relation to measures and how
that interacts with testing and tracing
Chris I don't know if you want to say
anything further I think that's exactly
the Joe Murphy from the Evening Standard
thank you first secretary um can i sir
Patrick following up on what you said
earlier you gave us the very good news
that R is less than 1 in the community
and presumably well below 1 in hospital
settings but you still seemed concerned
about other settings and the position
that the elderly population is obviously
the one that springs to mind are you
tacitly warning us prepare for a lot
more deaths to come despite today's good
news more deaths to come in old people's
homes it was ours below 1 in the
community there may be places where it's
not below one that might include certain
hospitals it might include certain care
settings and that's a very important
thing to tackle those numbers need to
come down there needs to be control of
the infection in those sorts of settings
currently the proportion that they
contribute to the overall picture is not
entirely clear there are measures being
taken and Chris could speak to this
better than I can to try to get on top
of these issues and they're important
ones that we do need to tackle if we're
going to drive the are down below one
right the way across every setting Joe
would you like to come back on that
no ask something else too Chris pretty
if I may on the question of masks um if
you could illuminate how you reach the
government's line that masks are no help
outside of care setting
because it's being challenged by experts
like Jeremy Howard and Jeremy Hunt who
says they may reduce the spread on
London Underground when people get back
to work
after lockdown specifically can we ask
when the government came to that
conclusion did it consider only the
medical evidence about transmission or
was it also taking into account the
obvious fact that there aren't at the
moment enough masks to go round to the
public well it's certainly the case that
if there was ever a competition between
health care workers and care workers in
the frontline and people using them in
situations where the risk is incredibly
low I don't think it takes a scientist
or a doctor to work out that would be a
very bad thing to happen and that's one
of the reasons why the Health World
Health Organisation reiterated his
advice that in most settings masks
should be for healthcare workers however
this is a very live issue that were that
we are reexamining and sage which
Patrick chairs relook to that this
morning other scientific groups are
relooking at the evidence I think my
summary to date would be the evidence is
weak but the evidence of a small effect
is there under certain circumstances and
what we're really trying to do is work
out under what circumstances if any
should we extend the advice and under
what circumstances should we not change
that advice but the point about
scientific advice is it evolves and that
is one of the things that we have to do
the whole times reexamine evidence this
comes in and that's the reason sages
looked at it and why we've looked at in
other scientific settings Getty
Donaldson from Bloomberg thank you and
to patrick balance in Crestwood see your
slides today show that the UK is still
tracking Italy in terms of deaths from
the outbreak given we were four weeks
behind Italy at the beginning of the
outbreak can you talk us through why
we're not making better progress
lowering the death rate and to the first
secretary of state there's been a lot of
talk this week from your colleagues in
Gnome the Tory party about a reckoning
with China do you think it will be
business as usual with China and this is
all over Georgia Joseph Esser yes I
think I've been clear that the ars come
down cases look as though they come down
spittle there's a lag time before that
translates into reduction in deaths you
can see that there's a flattening off of
ICU cases there's a potential flattening
off of deaths and I've said that that
probably will reach a plateau and then
come down that's very much the curve
that's been followed in other countries
so I pretty repeat what I said I think
right at the beginning that I thought we
were probably three or four weeks behind
Italy on the question in relation to
China look I think they're absolutely
needs to be a very very deep dive after
the event a review of the lessons
including at the outbreak of the virus
and I don't think we can flinch from
that at all and it needs to be driven by
the science at the same time I think the
one thing the corona virus has taught us
is the value and the importance of
international cooperation I've just been
standing in for the p.m. on the g7
meeting where we've been going through
all of the areas where the UK is
providing a leading role and working
very closely with all of our
international colleagues on and and I
have to say there are all of these
questions about the outbreak but also we
had very good cooperation with the
Chinese in relation to the return of UK
nationals the outset from Wuhan and we
have on procurement of things that we
need so we ought to look at all sides of
this and do it in a balanced way but
there's no doubt we we kind of business
as usual after this crisis and we'll
have to ask the hard questions about how
it came about and how it couldn't have
been stopped earlier did you want to
come back on any of that
it's just secretary what does that mean
in practice does that mean tariffs or
does it mean greater restrictions on
Chinese investment in the UK helps how
do you see that flowing out well what I
just said was that we'd look very
carefully and with all of the other
international partners and indeed with
the w-h-o and the other international
organisations as to how this outbreak
happened and what can be done to prevent
it happening
in the future I think before you get
those answers you can't really track a
way forward bill Jacobs from the
Lancashire Telegraph gentlemen a number
of Cohn mid-nineteen case
and deaths in the northwest is one of
the worst in the country as your slide
show do you have any reasons for why
this is such as deprivation or
widespread long term in an ill health
and are you taking special measures in
the region to tackle these tragically
high figures they're pointing at me so
I'll give a given answer to that and I
think on the on both sides of the
equation so until quite recently the
Northwest was tracking several other
bits of the country including the
southeast and the West Midlands but
below London and actually in the data
that support ryx you can see is actually
co vid cases in the northwest have
actually started to trend downwards
recently having previously being
trending upwards but it's quite a short
period time period so I don't want to
over read up on that issue the two areas
where I think we need to look
particularly carefully but I think
they're they're ones which is true
across the country we need to look quite
carefully at all cause mortality so not
just the co vid related mortality and
that it tends to be linked together and
we do need to look at care homes because
if you look at care homes where there
have been outbreaks quite a few of them
have been in the northwest and this is
why the measures that were announced
yesterday really to look at the care
home is here are so important but would
you like to come back with the last one
yes if the number of cases in the
northwest remains stubbornly high could
this mean a slower release from the
lockdown in the region but elsewhere in
the country and what steps is the
government taking to tackle mental
health problems as a result of the
pandemic well there's also I'll let
Chris address the mental health issue
but there's all sorts of fluidity in the
data what we need to do is make sure
that we continue to monitor it very
carefully we want to get it down across
all regions we want to get the are level
down as consistently as we possibly can
and also in terms of measures that might
be taken them be informed by
the evidence that we get back the
critical thing is to wait for sage has
done that analysis they talking about
doing it by the end of the month we'll
look at it very carefully and I don't
think we can jump ahead as to what the
measures might be or any of the
variations of it at this point answer
about bearish as well yes there isn't
really a huge variation in timing across
the country for most of this there's a
little bit
most things are following the same sort
of trajectory and actually most of us
right the way across the country have
adhere to the measures of social
distancing in the same way so there's
much more similarity than difference
actually in terms of the time course and
trajectory of the epidemic across the
country great at responding but just on
mental health and it's an absolutely key
point and one that we've been from the
beginning concerned about and there are
several different aspects to it she
include the risk of people increasing
loneliness and include issues about
delivery of mental health services
across the whole country and indeed
around the world in in this new era of
koban 19 at the moment we've set up
quite a large number of things to try
and look at how we can improve on mental
health services but you're absolutely
right it's an area where everybody who's
looked at this is concerned and that
recently been seriously looked by our
academic colleagues to try and work out
what are the things we need to do
differently
as a result of this Cova Depa demmick
for mental health than we would do under
normal circumstances thanks bill thanks
everyone and that brings to a close
today's press conference thank you very
much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News